---
title: >
    Computing Certificates of Members in Archimedean Quadratic Modules in $$\mathbb{A}[X]$$ 
    and Certifying the Emptiness in Inconsistent Monogenic Archimedean Quadratic Modules 
    in $$\mathbb{A}[X_1, \dots, X_n]$$
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/thesis_defense
venue: "Thesis Defense"
date: 2026-03-25
location: "Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA"
slidesurl: '/~jose.castellanosjoo/files/Thesis_Defense.pdf'
videourl: 'https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MPOVk7uQdSQ&t=219s'
---
Polynomials have been found to be a powerful tool over hundreds of years for
modeling problems in numerous applications in science, engineering, medicine,
and other domains; convex optimization, as an example, has many
applications. In the context of formal methods, polynomials arise in modeling
in aerospace software and robotics--especially collision avoidance,
cyber-physical and hybrid systems, autonomous vehicles and controllers based
on neural networks.  Optimization of a polynomial function subject to
polynomial constraints is investigated in many areas--to mention a few,
scheduling, resource allocation, financial systems including option pricing
and portfolio optimization, quantum information systems, control and system
theory, particularly analysis of dynamical systems such as stability,
equilibrium, and more recently, in sophisticated modeling of neurons in
deep neural networks and machine learning. Modern SMT solvers and theorem
provers often resort to linear approximations of polynomials as a pragmatic
solution due to the inherent complexities associated with reasoning about
polynomial inequalities.

A quadratic module is a linear combination of polynomials in a set of
generators (augmented with the constant 1) with sum of squares polynomials
as multipliers. This is in contrast to an ideal being the set of polynomials
as a linear combination of generators in which multipliers are simply
polynomials. The membership problem for a finitely generated quadratic module
can be decided; however, computing a certificate exhibiting why it is
nonnegative under the assumption that the generators are nonnegative, can be
nontrivial.

This thesis proposes a new symbolic algorithm to compute a certificate for members in
Archimedean quadratic modules in the general univariate case, i.e., no
constraints are imposed on the set of generators nor the input
polynomial. The algorithm takes as input a set of generators $$G$$ and an
input polynomial $$f \in QM(G)$$. The certificate witnessing the
membership of $$f$$ in the quadratic module generated by $$G$$ uses the original
set of generators $$G$$.

Finally, an algorithm to compute a certificate for $$-1$$ in inconsistent
quadratic modules in $$\mathbb{A}[X_1, \dots, X_n]$$ is presented. The algorithm has two parts. The
first part computes an upperbound of $$g$$ to obtain a B\'ezout-like identity
for $$-1$$. The second part lifts nonnegative polynomials to become sums of
squares adding additional terms in the monogenic quadratic module.
